Context:
All commands were executed on a Linux virtual machine (running in VMware), accessed remotely from Windows using VSCode over SSH.

1. Basic Directory and File Operations

These commands manage files and inspect the working directory.

ls

Lists all files and folders in the current directory.

pwd

Displays the absolute path of the current working directory.

touch file1.txt
touch day2.txt
touch githubpass.txt

Creates empty files. Used here to generate placeholder or working files inside the repository.

ls *.txt

Lists all files ending with .txt using wildcard matching.

ls *.??

Lists files with exactly two-character extensions, demonstrating shell globbing.

rm day2.txt

Deletes day2.txt from the filesystem.

cat file1.txt
cat day1.txt
cat testfile1.txt
cat day2.txt

Displays file contents to standard output for verification and inspection.

2. Command History Logging

Used to record terminal activity.

history

Shows previously executed shell commands.

history > day2.txt

Redirects the entire command history into day2.txt.
This was executed twice, overwriting the file with updated history.

Purpose:

Maintain a log of executed commands

Document lab activity

Track workflow steps

3. Network Interface Inspection

Used to verify VM networking.

ifconfig

Legacy command to display network interfaces.

ip a

Modern replacement for ifconfig. Displays IP addresses and interface states.

These confirm connectivity for SSH and Git operations.

4. Git Repository Setup

Initializing and cloning the repository.

git init

Initializes a local Git repository (not strictly needed since cloning follows).

git clone https://github.com/TarunRaina/devops_test_repo.git

Clones the remote GitHub repository into the VM.

cd devops_test_repo

Navigates into the cloned project directory.

5. Git User Configuration

Sets author identity for commits.

git config --global user.name "TarunRaina"
git config --global user.email "tarunraina.691@gmail.com"

Configures global Git username and email.

git config user.name
git config user.email

Verifies configured values.

6. Staging and Committing Changes

Managing tracked files.

git add .

Stages all modified and untracked files.

git add day2.txt

Stages only day2.txt.

git commit -m "day2 file - updated from vscode (windows) using ssh for linux"

Creates a commit with a message describing the cross-platform workflow.

git commit -m "Remove day2.txt from main"

Commits deletion of day2.txt.

7. Pushing Changes to GitHub

Synchronizing local commits with the remote repository.

git push -u origin main

Pushes the main branch to GitHub and sets upstream tracking.

git push

Pushes subsequent commits using the already configured upstream branch.

8. Branch Management

Working with feature branches.

git branch

Lists available branches.

git checkout day2_branch

Attempts to switch to day2_branch (before it existed).

git checkout -b day2_branch

Creates and switches to a new branch named day2_branch.

9. Repository Status Checks
git status

Displays the current state of the working directory and staging area.

Used to verify:

Modified files

Staged changes

Clean working tree